Greg Boone, Final Paper

Trade, Development and the Internet

Mark McCarthy, Georgetown University—CCT

August 15, 2012

**When Liberalizations Clash: The Curious Case of American Craft Beer**

***Introduction: The global trade system and beer***

Beer is an alcoholic beverage consisting, of four basic ingredients:
malted barley, hops, water, and yeast. This is the definition set out by
the German '*Reinheitsgebot*,' a 500 year old purity law that originally
did not include yeast (added after Louis Pasteur's discovery of
fermentation caused by the microorganisms), wheat or sugars that are
common ingredients in German beer today. Beyond regulating the purity of
beer, it also regulated price to between 1-2 Pfennigs (Home Brewer’s
Digest, 2012). This first regulation of beer was meant to keep the beer
and bread industries from competing, though by today's agreements in the
global trade system the *Reinheitsgebot* could be criticized as a
non-tariff barrier to trade because foreign producers who use rice and
rye in beers could challenge it saying it unfairly raises the cost of
entering the German market. Hundreds of years later and an ocean away,
The United States and Canada traded jabs in dispute panels on the issue
of beer. At the same time, small brewing companies have cropped up in
the US and have been gradually siphoning market share from the major
global brewing companies. More than 2,000 such firms exist today that
did not in the early 1990s; they owe their existence to laws passed by
state governments who amended existing regulations to open up the
market. It was exactly these laws Canada challenged before a dispute
resolution panel of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Contracting
Parties in 1992 that illustrates the hidden complexities behind the
surface of market liberalization.

Beer, wine and spirits were a source of much contention in the waning
days of the GATT system, with important panel decisions being issued
against Canadian and United States beer laws that interfere with the
level playing field the Agreement was to promote. The Canadian laws,
challenged by the US in 1988, related to distribution of exports, which
were relegated by law to specialized stores across the country and were
not allowed to be kept in a cooler with “like domestic products” (Canada
– Liquor Boards [EEC]). In the United States, the disputes targeted the
especially fragmented patchwork of alcoholic beverage laws in each of
the fifty states, some of which treated foreign beers differently than
some domestic beers. These state laws came about both because of the
federal system in the US which gives the individual states significant
authority to regulate commerce within their own borders, and the 21^st^
Amendment to the United States Constitution which ended Prohibition and
gave the states express responsibility to regulate the commerce of
alcohol.

These laws are sometimes strange. In Pennsylvania, beer may be sold in
liquor stores (called distributors) by the case only, while restaurants
may sell six packs, but only up to a certain quantity (Fishlock, 2010).
In Minnesota beer over 3.2% alcohol by weight can only be sold at
specially licensed liquor stores that are forbidden (along with car
dealerships) from operating on Sunday, though under beer under 3.2% can
be sold in grocery stores (Guntzel, 2011, US – Malt Beverages). In some
states, these kinds of laws are meant to promote temperance, in others,
only a certain *kind* of consumption by restricting sales. But at the
same time as these laws restrict growth of the alcoholic beverage
industry, the small but growing craft brewing industry have begin
brewing small batches with distribution often limited to the brewery's
immediate surroundings. This niche of the industry is growing rapidly,
while the industry in general, including the American import market, is
shrinking (Brewers Association | Facts, 2012). It is a tale of local
laws designed to create an industry, but appear weakly protectionist,
and high risk entrepreneurship in which small firms end up emerging
victorious over the large, established, multinational firms once thought
to be industry leaders.

**To Liberalize: A call for peace and free trade in a cutthroat world**

Following the Second World War, a group of 13 nations came together to
sign an agreement to liberalize global trade. The thinking was that free
and open exchange of goods would promote peace and prosperity across the
globe (Hoekman and Kostecki, 2010 p. 22-27). This General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was not a single undertaking to unilaterally
establish an organization for the liberalization of the global
marketplace, that would come later, instead the Contracting Parties
launched periodic rounds of negotiations that gradually opened up trade
over the course of the next 46 years.

The GATT was guided by the principles of Most Favored Nations (MFN) and
National Treatment. Most Favored Nations is a principle regarding a
nation’s consistent treatment of other nations. Whatever benefits or
liberalizations a country is willing to give to one, it extends to all
other parties in the agreement. When the United States agrees to
liberalize tariffs on autos, it must do so toward all autos, regardless
of where they are built. National Treatment is a principle guiding the
nation’s domestic treatment of goods manufactured abroad as equal to
those manufactured within its own borders. In the present dispute
resolution system at the World Trade Organization, a country must show
that its laws are necessary, and that there is not a less restrictive
means by which to accomplish the same goal in order to justify keeping a
law which is inconsistent with either of these principles.

Problems quickly emerged with the GATT system, as time wore on it became
clear that participation was more “*àla carte*” with any party holding
veto power over any decision with which it disagreed, including dispute
settlements. After nine rounds of such negotiations, the GATT's Uruguay
Round, shifted gears and endeavored upon a single undertaking to
liberalize trade, ended the GATT, and established the World Trade
Organization, a member supported organization with a binding dispute
settlement system, and more inclusive negotiation system (Hoekman and
Kostecki, p. 46-51.

The WTO continued in the spirit of the GATT and included the General
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) which extended the cause of trade
liberalization into service areas that were not thought of as trade but
social policies meant to be the responsibility of the national
governments. Suddenly things like financial and legal services were
trade issues and later, following the TRIPS agreement, trademark,
copyright and patent protection also came under the WTO's auspices. The
GATT had countries agreeing to lower tariffs for beer, but said nothing
about regulating who could open a brewery. Following GATS, countries
were committed to opening in "service" areas of the beer trade. Any law
prohibiting a foreign firm from opening a brewery inside the borders of
another country could be considered a trade barrier. Member states also
agreed in TRIPS to respect trademarks and product origin marks from
around the world. This latter aspect was more contentious in the wine
industry, with France concerned over the proper marking of a Champagne,
for example. In beer it became relevant for companies like
Anheuser-Busch—an American company operating 15 breweries outside its
home country and licensing its recipes to many others—that had used a
trademark name since the late 1860s identical to a Czech brewery called
Budweiser (Blenkinsop, 2011).

Supporters of free trade and the WTO system argue that liberalized trade
raises up small economies by eliminating the waste of underperforming
industries, orienting the country away from mercantilism and toward
specializing in the area where it is strongest. This specialization,
called the country's comparative advantage, will raise the quality of
goods in the area where the country can best perform and ultimately
demand for that country's goods will go up. Even if the country is not
'best' at something, it still has a comparative advantage where it is
least poor, or so the theory goes (Hoekman and Kostecki, p. 30).

It is hard to argue that the United States had a comparative advantage
compared to other beer producing countries from 1946 up through the
creation of the WTO following Uruguay. The late 1980s pre-WTO trade
landscape showed beer at less than a tenth of one percent of world
trade, and the major exporters were "Netherlands, West Germany,
Czechoslovakia, Belgium and Canada" (Karrenbrock, 1990). Though the
United States brewing industry grew more than nine times over between
1983 and 1993, the US was still the leading *importer* of beer, and the
domestic market was limited to a small number of firms making basically
the same product; in 2009 three firms, Miller, Coors and Anheuser-Busch,
controlled 73% of the domestic market while crafts made up less than 5%,
and imports the remaining 12% (Beer Wars, 2009). Imports did well in the
American market during this period because they filled a niche of beers
that tasted differently, were supposedly brewed according to historic
traditions that forbade corn, rice, and other additives that foreign
brewers used to lighten up the brew. Imports continued to do well in
these years and up through 2001 when Consumer Reports noted that imports
were "the only real challenger" to "Millercoorweiser," as the three
major brewers were apparently known (Consumer Reports, 2001).

It was around the same time that Consumer Reports wrote off craft
breweries as a dying trend that these little players that the GATS
allowed importers to set up shop in the US. Not only were imports being
treated like local goods, but now there was no law that could prevent
them from being brewed domestically too. Foreign brewers were showing
the US beer drinker what a pure beer tasted like, and Americans were
buying it. Importers, that is to say, had a comparative advantage over
these new craft breweries. Critics of liberalized trade would expect the
craft beer market to disappear. Their products were just as expensive as
the imports, if not more, and the only benchmark for American beer were
the "millcoorweiser" beers consumers were already quite loyal to. Why
should a consumer take a gamble on an eight dollar beer when they could
get twice as much for the same price from AB or a better value from an
import? Entrepreneurial brewers changed laws, opened doors, and ran up
high debts in order to win the hearts and minds of American consumers,
taking it on themselves to ease the high barriers to entry put up by the
behemoth industry leaders, and the laws that kept them at the top.

**Legal Issues Post-Prohibition**

From 1919 until 1933 the United States had no beer market. Thanks to the
18th Amendment to the United States Constitution, the United States
entered into a period known as Prohibition and when it ended, the market
remained heavily restricted. The 18^th^ Amendment prohibited the
“manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors...for
beverage purposes” in the United States, as well as banning all imports
(18^th^ Amendment). The prohibition was universal: nobody could traffic
alcohol to, from, or through any jurisdiction of the United States. It’s
repeal, the 21^st^ Amendment was not so universal, however. With the
18^th^ Amendment wholly reversed, it was up to the states to actually
change their local laws and restart their markets. All the 21st
Amendment did was allow that possibility. Mississippi, for example kept
its prohibition laws on the books for another 33 years after the
Amendment’s ratification (and was among eight states that never
considered it for ratification because it had been dry since 1909), and
about half the state’s counties were still “dry” as of 2007 (Burkhart,
2007).

The post-Prohibition regime became one where if an action involving
alcoholic beverages was not expressly allowed, it was likely still
illegal. It was also one where laws relating to alcoholic beverages
varied so widely as to become unpredictable.

Large firms that survived Prohibition had no trouble navigating the new
legal landscape, they were glad to be back in (legal) business and given
that these were mostly large companies, had plenty of resources to
figure out how to operate around the country again. One thing that aided
them was the three tier distribution system most states set up in
response to the Federal Alcohol Administration Act’s mandate for states
to abolish the 'tied house' anti-competitive behaviors breweries engaged
in before Prohibition (when breweries typically owned the bars where
their beers were sold and furnished them with all manner of fixtures
bearing their logos: bar stools, tables, glasses, coasters, decorations,
etc.) (US – Malt Beverages). The three tier system inserted a middle
party, the distributor, between the producer and the retailer. The idea
was that the third party would give something like “national treatment”
to all brands, as well as encouraging either temperance, tax revenue, or
both by inflating prices. If a bar or retailer wanted Budweiser and
Miller on tap, they could get both from distributors at equal prices in
addition to shedding the burden of having to manage inventory and
coordination with individual breweries. All beers were equal, regardless
of where they came from, or at least that was the hope (Beliveau and
Rouse, 2010).

What ended up happening was that Anheuser-Busch, by way of having a
large enough product line, was able to supply one distributor with
enough business to meet capacity. Miller and Coors eventually joined
forces to fill enough of another distributor's capacity. This left small
brewers, many of whom could barely meet demand in their local area, all
crowding on to the same distributor's trucks. Small brewers became
frustrated by this prohibitive system and sought to find a way to exist
without it (*Beer Wars*, 2009). State and local governments responded by
allowing local breweries to circumvent the system. The concept of a brew
pub became a reality in places like Delaware, for example, where Dogfish
Head wanted a place to experiment with new beers, host events, and
establish themselves as a small business, but needed a law change to own
a brewery in Delaware and sell that beer on site.

These laws were not crafted by industry associations lobbying the state
government, in Delaware, Dogfish Head’s owner, Sam Calagione, drove from
Milton to Dover "and started knocking on doors" of house and senate
members. Eventually one of them told him to write up a bill, and six
months later it was signed into law (Bilger, 2008). The State of
Delaware was not protecting an industry when it allowed Calagione to
open his brewery, it was allowing one to exist. In 2011 a similar law
touted by Surly Brewing company’s Omar Ansari opened up Minnesota’s
market for brew pubs. Surly’s eponymous bill made it legal for breweries
to sell beer at the site of the brewery as well as package it for
distribution (Roper, 2011). Ansari was no stranger to lobbying either,
like Calagione, it was illegal to open a brewery in Surly’s home of
Brooklyn Center, MN until he lobbied the city government to change the
law (Grumdahl, 2007).

Calagione and Ansari both knew that it did not make sense that they
should have to contract with a distributor to deliver beer to a
restaurant in the same building as the brewery, but the three tier
system was design to prevent exactly that. These laws, then, were passed
to liberalize the domestic market to open up an industry for new
competition. Surely liberalizing a domestic market would only make for a
more equitable international market. Ironically enough, it was laws like
these that were the target of a GATT dispute brought by Canada against
the United States in 1992.

**Liberalization at the Sake of Liberalization**

The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) came with a well
constructed if relatively weak dispute resolution system compared with
the one established during the Uruguay Round negotiations that led to
the creation of the World Trade Organization. It's primary weakness,
according to many, was that any of the GATT's contracting parties, even
the defending state, could veto any decision taken by a panel. That
meant the European Union could take Canada to court for a discriminatory
beer distribution system (as they did in 1988), argue an eloquent case
against it and even be declared a winner (Canada – Provincial Liquor
Boards [EEC]), but Canada could simply ignore it without consequence.
This was the system under which the United States was brought to the
GATT policies that seemed to violate both the Most Favored Nations and
National Treatment principles that underly the GATT, thereby
constituting non-tariff barriers to trade. The case, brought by Canada
and supported by several other Contracting Parties including Australia
and the European Union, argued that many of the laws in the several
states regulating the commerce of beer, wine and spirits gave
preferential treatment to domestic firms and therefore discriminated
against foreign competition.

Canada looked at the barriers to entry in the United States for its own
breweries and saw an unpredictable market that was designed to make it
easier for some domestic firms to enter and harder for everybody else.
In Canada's words, they had received:

...complaints received from the Canadian beer and wine industries
that...federal excise tax measures introduced in 1991...as well as a
wide range of state tax measures, distribution barriers, licensing fees,
transportation requirements, alcohol content regulations, and
listing/delisting policies. These measures operated to create
significant discrimination against Canadian beer, wine and cider in the
United States market (US – Malt Beverages).

The GATT Panel examined 27 separate policies the United States had in
place across as many principalities. At issue were not "dry"
jurisdictions, where alcoholic beverages were universally prohibited,
rather

Internal taxes levied...by the states of New York, Rhode Island,
Kentucky, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico [which] operated to create a lower tax on domestic beer
than on imported beer.... The requirements imposed in the United States
by the states of Alaska, California, Connecticut, Florida, Hawaii,
Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, New Hampshire,
Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin that imported
beer...could be sold only through wholesalers or other middlemen while
the local like product could be sold directly to retailers including
those dedicated retail outlets owned and operated by domestic breweries
and wineries.... Requirements imposed in the United States by the states
of Arizona, California, Maine, Mississippi, and South Carolina that
imported beer...be transported into and within a state only by a common
carrier while no such requirement was imposed on the like domestic
(in-state) product.... Application...by the states of Alaska...and
Vermont...of a higher licensing fee for imported product than applied to
the like domestic product.... Fixing of price levels...by the states of
Massachusetts and Rhode Island for imported beer and wine on the basis
of the price of those products in other neighbouring states, but
exempting the like domestic product from this requirement.... The
listing and delisting practices maintained...by the states of Alabama,
Idaho, Mississippi, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania,
Vermont and Virginia which provided more favourable treatment to
domestic products.... Restrictions on points of sale, distribution and
labelling based on the alcohol content of beer above 3.2 per cent
alcohol by volume maintained in the United States by the states of
Alabama, Colorado, Florida, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Oklahoma,
Oregon, and Utah (US – Malt Beverages).

On the surface many of these look like blatant non-tariff barriers.
Price fixing for imports that exempt domestic products, listing which
provides favorable treatment to domestic products, circumvention of a
distribution system for certain domestic products only, higher license
fees for imports, etc.; in any other industry these would be classic
trade barriers because they make doing business in the United States
more difficult for the foreign firms. The GATT panel gave the case to
Canada, agreeing that these laws were inconsistent with the United
States' commitments to the Contracting Parties.

With regard to the laws which allowed in-state producers to circumvent
the distribution system faced by out of state producers, the United
States argued that the law caused no real damage because an overwhelming
percentage (98.5%) of producers do not take advantage of the loophole.
The Panel responded, perhaps obviously, by saying that what private
firms do in the marketplace is not at issue in a GATT panel, it is
whether a law exists which gives preferential treatment to domestic
products over foreign and thus a law which exempts any domestic firms
from a complexity faced by any foreign firms is inconsistent with GATT
commitments (US – Malt Beverages).

The interesting part of the Panel decision was its ruling on the United
States' argument that out of state domestic firms were also subject to
the regulations imposed on foreign beers. Here the panel said that such
a policy is still inconsistent because the commitment requires foreign
firms to have as favorable treatment as the *most favored*domestic
product. This means those laws are perfectly fine if they apply to
in-state breweries and imports only, but they could still exclude
out-of-state domestic beers. In Minnesota, then, it would be perfectly
fine to allow imports and Surly to circumvent the distribution system
but keep Anheuser-Busch behind the massive trade barrier. It's only
wrong if the imports are also behind the wall Surly can get around.

The logical inconsistency of this ruling from the Panel is fascinating
because the spirit of the GATT is to promote a freer market but, because
it is focused on international liberalization, it is agnostic to whether
its rulings may actually restrict the domestic market and the benefit
the laws may have domestically.

**Infant Industry, or Neonatal industry?**

The term 'infant industry protectionism' refers to policies meant to
establish trade barriers to shield a small country’s new or
underdeveloped industries from global competition until the country
discovers its comparative advantage. It is not new. While the term dates
back to Alexander Hamilton, the principle it is based on is much older,
and, some argue, has been fundamental to the economic success of nearly
every modern economy. Ha-Joon Chang, in *Bad Samaritans: The Myth of
Free Trade and the Secret History of Capitalism*, presented a history of
the British Empire's protectionist policies that allowed it to develop a
strong industrial economy before abolishing the Corn Laws in 1846 and
constructing the free trade bandwagon. These protectionist measures,
which included tariffs, preferential treatment for domestic goods, and
inconsistent and discriminatory distribution schemes across Britain's
trading partners, allowed Britain to discover its comparative advantage;
once it had done so, it no longer needed its severely, protectionist
policies and had a sudden revelation about the power of free global
trade. Chang reveled in the irony of industrialized countries like
Britain who suddenly drop their trade barriers after years of
protectionism and demand others unilaterally do the same (Chang 2008).

Infant industries policies were put in place to protect local industries
that are in the early stages of development. In the early United States,
Alexander Hamilton wanted to raise up barriers like "tariffs and import
bans; subsidies; export ban[s] on key raw materials; import
liberalization of and tariff rebates on industrial inputs; prizes and
patents for inventions; regulation of product standards; and development
of financial and transportation infrastructures" (Chang, 2008). The
country had a burgeoning manufacturing industry Hamilton wanted to see
succeed. After the US figured out what it could produce most
efficiently, then it would talk about opening up to the rest of the
world.

Not only should countries put these in place, "practically all of
today's rich countries" practiced some form of infant industry
protection. And they almost all "kick away the ladder," a term Chang
borrowed from German economist Friedrich List to describe how Britain
threw down its protectionist barriers when it becomes convenient and
demanded others do the same. South Korea, Chang noted, is "the newest
member of the club of rich countries" and recently began to engage in
its share of ladder kicking, though only where convenient (Chang, 2008,
p. 16).

Laws like the "Surly Law" in Minnesota, or Calagione's legislation in
Delaware, are indeed protectionist if looked at without the context of
what these laws were meant to do. Given the proper context, it is clear
these were not infant industry laws, but something closer to *neonatal*
industry laws trying to arrange the landscape for an industry’s
existence not shelter it from competition.

A better defense of the US laws would be to argue these laws were
necessary for the creation of an industry. Laws requiring breweries to
go through a common carrier when bringing beers into the state do not
make sense if the beer is in the state upon manufacture, nor do laws
prohibiting the sale of beer at the site of production make sense for
firms that cannot afford to meet demand, let alone exclusively supplying
all the bars and liquor stores in a city. These laws are consistent with
the GATT because they encourage more competition in the US marketplace
that will ultimately result in a more efficient market where success is
based on who has the strongest product. If Molson Brewing in Canada has
trouble competing with local US breweries, perhaps they should make a
better product or exit; or perhaps they should consider targeting their
rage at the real culprit, the three tiered system of distribution.

**Conclusion: A changed market, and an old system**

The late 1980s and early 90s saw a beer, wine, and sprits skirmish over
North America's 48th parallel as the governments of the United States
and Canada badgered each other around GATT panels over non-tariff trade
barriers. In many ways US – Malt Liquor was a response to the US being
on the wrong side of Canada – Provincial Liquor Boards (EEC)–the latter
was over a distribution system that segregated distribution of imports
and domestic products, and discriminated against Imports in the
marketplace.^[^1^](#sdfootnote1sym)^ Since these cases were brought and
settled, the beer industry itself has undergone significant changes.
Namely, export-capable breweries around the world consolidated into
large conglomerations.

In 2004 Anheuser-Busch, an American conglomerate with more than 50
brands to its name, merged with the Belgian-Brazilian firm InBev—itself
a multinational conglomeration of Belgium's largest breweries
(previously called Interbrew, the "In" in InBev) joined with Brazil’s
largest (previously called AmBev, the "Bev" half)—to form the largest
brewing company in the world: AB InBev. This firm is responsible for the
distribution of more than 200 beer brands that can be found in
establishments including the grandest of five star restaurants and the
tiniest of grocery stores in cities across the globe. Brands like Stella
Artois, Becks, Budweiser, Leffe, Hoegaarden, and dozens of others are
distributed by this multinational, mega-corporation (Anheuser-Busch
InBev - Brands -). In June 2012 AB InBev announced its intention to buy
the remaining stock of Grupo Modelo, the company responsible for Corona
and many Latin American beer brands and a long standing partner of the
beer conglomerate (AB InBev Press Release, 2012).

Miller has a similar story, shortly after partnering with Coors for
American distribution, America's second largest brewery merged with
international conglomerate South African Breweries Limited (SAB) to
become the second largest beer company in the world, with brands from
every inhabited continent: SABMiller (SABMiller - Brands - Brand
explorer - All brands A-Z - A - F, 2012). A major advantage to being
conglomerated together is that companies can circumvent trade barriers
abroad and increase market share by brewing foreign beers outside the
home country. Being part of the same company makes this process easier
and lowers transaction costs of entering a new market.

The biggest transaction cost to entering a new market is the cost of
either shipping enough beer to be profitable, or licensing a contract
brewery to brew and package the product. Licensing is not an option
breweries are warm to because of the quality control problems associated
with handing the keys of the company's product to another party. Beer
recipes are typically protected by trade secrets, particularly the
methods by which the product is created. Sometimes a brewery will
release a recipe to homebrewers, as Avery Brewing in Boulder, CO did in
August of 2012 or release kits for hobbyists to make 'clones' of a
specific style of beer. But releasing a recipe to hobbyists and allowing
it to be sold commercially are vastly different, and not a risk many are
willing to take. A notable exception here is the 21st Amendment Brewing
Company, a brew pub in San Francisco, CA that packages and distributes
its beer out of a contract brewery in Cold Spring, MN.

After licensing there is producing enough to make wide distribution
viable. Beer is mostly water and sold in glass bottles, pint sized cans,
or half- or quarter-barrel kegs. A half-barrel keg weighs a total of 160
pounds and will serve 125 pints to one bar. A craft brewery like
Minnesota's Surly Brewing Company will produce fewer than 12,000 barrels
of beer in a year and will distribute those barrels across kegs, cans,
or bottles across the various recipes they brew (Ansari, 2011). In
Surly's case that's two thousand barrels per beer annually (assuming
they produce all four "year round" beers and one "seasonal" at a time
throughout the year. [Surly Brewing Company | Beer | Year Round Beers, …
| Seasonal Beers, 2012]). Every keg of beer shipped outside the local
market is a big risk for Surly. They first have to ship enough to at
least break even, which can be achieved by raising prices (potentially
hurting sales) and increasing volume shipped (potentially resulting in
wasted surplus). This is especially risky as the beer becomes more
popular in the home market, as each barrel shipped out is a loss of
guaranteed sales domestically. A bigger firm like New Belgium is able to
enter new markets easier because they brew tremendously more than Surly.
At 712,000 barrels in 2011, the Colorado brewery announced in 2012 that
to help with distribution to the East coast, it would open a \$175
million satellite brewery in Asheville, NC. The new brewery will allow
them to brew up to 400,000 more barrels per year. Asheville's largest
local brewery produces just 28,000 barrels per year (Nine News, 2012).

On top of the shipping transaction costs is the three tier distribution
system that makes distributing to another state (and sometimes inside
the home state) quite challenging if not impossible without the added
transaction cost of negotiating with a distributor. If the system is
this hard to navigate for small, domestic firms, it gets even more so
when the cost of shipping also includes crossing an ocean or continent.

The most surprising thing about Canada's GATT challenge to the WTO is
why it chose to go after the laws that were put in place to help small
firms get around the three tiered system and not the system itself. At
the root of the problem is a domestic market with high, unnecessary
barriers to entry, but if there is one thing the three tiered
distribution system has going for it, it's that it is universal. If
someone wants to distribute beer in the United States, it does not
matter who they are, or where they come from, they are required to use
this system (unless they are in the State of Washington which enforces
the FAAA's 'tied house' requirement differently). It is not a tariff,
and making the case this system is inconsistent with the principles of
Most Favored Nations and National Treatment is difficult. Despite the
fact that completely eliminating it could make it much easier for
Canadian breweries to access the American market, from the GATT’s
perspective it is better policy than treating foreign brands differently
from domestic brands.

Perhaps Canada took on the exemptions to the system because they truly
believed it would help with their market access, or perhaps, given the
proximity of the cases, this was simple retaliation for the United
States' support of the European Union against Canada in 1988 (Canada –
Provincial Liquor Boards [EEC]). Regardless of Canada's motives, it
sought to strike down the very laws that lowered market access barriers
in one sector of the American market in favor of lowering barriers in
another. Had it done it in the WTO, it may have had some kind of binding
affect, and perhaps state lawmakers would have been compelled to act; it
is impossible to know.

The US Beer case is a classic example of the world trade system's
indifference to domestic economic and political situations. In this case
the GATT panel did not seem to care that without the laws in question,
many of their beneficiaries would not be legally permitted to exist and
compete with the rest of the economy. The larger firms, whose existence
predated the laws under fire and benefit from the bureaucratic system
they were designed to circumvent, do not have to worry about the
environment for starting a new business in their local economy, but the
entrepreneurs do, and are willing to go great lengths to overturn the
laws impeding their success. In this classic David vs. Goliath
situation, however, the global trade system favors Goliath while local
governments favor David, and neither particularly care for the other.
Foreign firms have to choose which half of the equation to side with,
and may find a common enemy in the Three Tied Distribution system,
rather than protectionism.

**Sources:**

1.  Anheuser-Busch InBev - Brands -. 2012. Accessed August 14, 2012.
    URL:
    [http://www.ab-inbev.com/go/brands.cfm](http://www.ab-inbev.com/go/brands.cfm)

2.  Anheuser-Busch InBev Press Release. 2012. “Anheuser-Busch InBev and
    Grupo Modelo to Combine, Next Step in Long and Successful
    Partnership.” June 29. Accessed August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.ab-inbev.com/press\_releases/hugin\_pdf/518847.pdf](http://www.ab-inbev.com/press_releases/hugin_pdf/518847.pdf)

3.  Ansari, Omar. “Beers.” Surly Brewing Company. URL:
    [http://surlybrewing.com/beers.html](http://surlybrewing.com/beers.html)

4.  Ansari, Omar. 2011. “2.7.11” *Brewer’s Blog.*February 7.**Accessed:
    August 12, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.surlybrewing.com/brewersblog/?p=12](http://www.surlybrewing.com/brewersblog/?p=12)

5.  *Beer Wars.*2007. Motion picture, Ducks in a Row Entertainment
    Corporation. Baron, Anat, director, writer.

6.  Beliveau, Barbara C. and M. Elizabeth Rouse. 2010. “Prohibition and
    Repeal: A short History of the Wine Industry’s Regulation in the
    United states.” J. Of Wine Economics. November, Volume 5:1. p.
    53-68. Accessed: August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://wine-economics.org/journal/content/Volume5/number1/Full%20Texts/5\_wine%20economics\_vol%205\_1\_Beliveaur.pdf](http://wine-economics.org/journal/content/Volume5/number1/Full%20Texts/5_wine%20economics_vol%205_1_Beliveaur.pdf)

7.  Bilger, Burkhard, 2008. “A Better Brew.” November 24. *The New
    Yorker*. Accessed. August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/11/24/081124fa\_fact\_bilger?currentPage=all](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/11/24/081124fa_fact_bilger?currentPage=all)

8.  Blenkinsop, Philip. 2011. “AB InBev, Budvar can both use ‘Budweiser’
    in UK - court.” September 22. Reuters. Accessed: August 14, 2012.
    URL:
    [http://uk.reuters.com/article/2011/09/22/uk-budweiser-idUKTRE78L1QG20110922](http://uk.reuters.com/article/2011/09/22/uk-budweiser-idUKTRE78L1QG20110922)

9.  Brewers Association | Facts. 2012. *Brewers Association.* Accessed:
    August 15, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.brewersassociation.org/pages/business-tools/craft-brewing-statistics/facts](http://www.brewersassociation.org/pages/business-tools/craft-brewing-statistics/facts)

10. Burkhart, Jeff. 2007. “Something to celebrate: Repeal of
    Prohibition.” December 6. *Marin Independent Journal*. Marin, CA.
    Accessed: August 14, 2012.

11. Chang, Ha-Joon. 2008. *Bad Samaritans: the Myth of Free Trade and
    the Secret History of Capitalism.* Bloomsbury Press; New York.

12. Consumer Reports. 2001. “Which brew for you? ('Millcoorweiser' still
    rules the market, but imports are on the rise. Our taste tests make
    you wonder why.)” August; Vol. 66:8. p. 10. Accessed: August 14,
    2012. Via LexisNexis Academic.

13. Fishlock, Diana, 2010. “Buying beer? The battle over where
    Pennsylvania consumers can buy their beer is heating up.” February
    4. The Patriot-News. Accessed August 13, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2010/02/buying\_beer\_the\_battle\_over\_wh.html](http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2010/02/buying_beer_the_battle_over_wh.html)

14. GATT Panel Report, Canada – Import, Distribution and Sale of
    Alcoholic Drinks by Canadian Provincial Marketing Agencies, L/6304,
    adopted 22 March 1988, BISD 35S/37

15. GATT Panel Report, United States – Measures Affecting Alcoholic and
    Malt Beverages, DS23/R, adopted 19 June 1992, BISD 39S/206

16. Grumdahl, Dara Moskowitz. 2007. “Surly Nation.” August 15.
    *Citypages.*Accessed: August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.citypages.com/2007-08-15/restaurants/surly-nation/](http://www.citypages.com/2007-08-15/restaurants/surly-nation/)

17. Guntzel, Jeff Severns, 2011. “Sunday liquor sales: Who is fighting
    them and why?” March 24. MinnPost. Accessed August 13, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.minnpost.com/intelligencer/2011/03/sunday-liquor-sales-who-fighting-them-and-why](http://www.minnpost.com/intelligencer/2011/03/sunday-liquor-sales-who-fighting-them-and-why)

18. Home Brew Digest, 2012. Translation of the *Reinheitsgebot*,
    [http://hbd.org/brewery/library/ReinHeit.html](http://hbd.org/brewery/library/ReinHeit.html)

19. Karrenbrock, Jeffrey D. 1990. The Internationalizatino of the Beer
    Brewing Industry. November. *Review.* Federal Reserve Bank of St.
    Louis. p. 3-19. Accessed: August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/90/11/Beer\_Nov\_Dec1990.pdf](http://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/90/11/Beer_Nov_Dec1990.pdf)

20. Nine News. 2012. “Fort Collins-based New Belgium Brewing to open
    facility in Asheville, N.C.” *Fort Collins Coloradoan.* Accessed:
    August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.9news.com/rss/story.aspx?storyid=261296](http://www.9news.com/rss/story.aspx?storyid=261296)

21. Roper, Eric. 2011. “‘Surly bill’ becomes law.” May 24. *Star
    Tribune: Hot Dish Politics*. Accessed: August 14, 2012
    [http://www.startribune.com/politics/statelocal/122536608.html](http://www.startribune.com/politics/statelocal/122536608.html)

22. SABMiller. 2012. “SABMiller - Brands - Brand explorer - All brands
    A-Z - A - F” Corporate Website. Accessed: August 14, 2012. URL:
    [http://www.sabmiller.com/index.asp?pageid=315](http://www.sabmiller.com/index.asp?pageid=315)

23. Surly Brewing Company. 2012. “Surly Brewing Company | Beer | Year
    Round Beer” Accessed: August 12, 2012.
    [http://www.surlybrewing.com/beer/year-round-beers.html](http://www.surlybrewing.com/beer/year-round-beers.html)

[1](#sdfootnote1anc) It’s worth noting here there was also a Canada –
Provincial Liquor Boards (US) adopted in 1992 a few months before US –
Malt Beverages, given the time involved in resolving a GATT dispute, it
is unlikely US – Malt Beverages was retaliatory for that case.

\

